https://www.checkpoint.com/downloads/products/secure-remote-access-best-practices-in-disaster-recovery-scenarios.pdf


As a general rule, all Check Point security gateways are
equipped with Remote Access VPN capabilities that can
be enabled to operate immediately by activating
certain licenses. The activation and configuration of
Remote Access is very simple and intuitive and does
not require a significant level of technical knowledge
from the administrator. To improve the user
experience, Check Point also provides different types
and methods of access; from the clientless to clientbased remote access VPN solutions, depending on the
required level of access and types of applications in
use.


There are several factors to consider when choosing remote access solutions for your organization:
Client-Based vs. Clientless – Installing a full software client enables the provisioning of multiple
security features in a single solution: remote access, personal firewall, zero-day attack prevention,
malware scanning, disk encryption, port protection, content security and many other capabilities. A
full client also provides support for more complex encryption and authentication methods as well
as a rich set of network configuration options, such as the allocation of internal-to-the-corporatenetwork IP addresses to remote machines. However, installing a full client requires administrators
to validate configuration settings, define policies and conduct user acceptance testing. Client-less
solutions provide far less features and often leverage functionality delivered by other desktop
solutions, such as browsers and operating system components.
Device security requirements – In general, the rule of least privilege applies in all security
scenarios. Namely, only those people who require access should receive such access, and only
those machines that should connect to systems should be allowed to do so. Once a decision is
taken to enable remote access, the next step in the security process is to determine the trust,
privilege and risk levels of the users and devices that will access internal resources. When the
combination of risk and privilege are high, a stringent set of controls needs to be applied. These can
be delivered at the network level, meaning the employees’ computers at home should not be
trusted at all and any access should be contained within company controlled workspaces on the
employees’ machines. This type of model can be supported by remote desktop like solutions that
leverage SSL connections. Users remotely connect to their desktops in the office, and any and all
work is performed on the corporate machine located within corporate boundaries. Alternatively,
companies can also take-over employee computers at home and install a full set of security
controls on those machines. In so doing, they effectively turn the employee’s computer into a
corporate asset and apply full personal firewall, anti-malware, APT inspection, disk encryption and
also IPSec VPN to the device. Of course, there are multiple alternatives within these two extremes,
and the different remote access options are intended to support such alternatives.


Secure Connectivity – When considering remote access options, administrators should determine if
users will require the ability to work on their home machines (corporate or personal) with the same
user experience as when in the office, or will it be acceptable to provide limited access to specific
applications. In general, IPSec VPN solutions are best at replicating an in-office experience for
employees working from home. In IPSec scenarios, the VPN inserts itself at the IP stack level and
encrypts all network communications between the user’s machine and the corporate network. SSL
tends to be more application specific and ensures the privacy of the communications channels
between the applications running on the user’s machines and the back-end systems to which they
communicate. In essence, with IPSec, administrators focus on building the secure communications
path for the machine to the corporate network, while with SSL, IT teams ensure that the
applications hosted on corporate resources are designed for SSL connections to employee devices.
The following section summarizes highlights on the architectural considerations for implementing
different remote access options.

All remote access connections terminate at a gateway. The location of the VPN concentration
solution carries with it security administrative implications that should be understood prior to
implementing access to connecting machines.
The following section highlights a number of options for designing VPN gateways in the network.
Scenario 1: Simple perimeter gateway deployment for
smaller companies
In the simplest remote access deployment, a single
gateway, or cluster, inspects all traffic, including
sessions with remote access clients.
The gateway runs a full stack of security protections,
including firewall, VPN, intrusion prevention,
application control and content security, advanced
threat prevention and others. The gateway would be
configured on the network perimeter.
This configuration is the simplest and is relevant for
smaller organizations who do not need to support
multiple network segments and in-house hosted
applications.
Scenario 2: VPN gateway as a dedicated security gateway in
DMZ
When a remote access enabled Security Gateway is placed in
the DMZ, traffic initiated both from the Internet and from
the LAN to mobile users is subject to firewall restrictions.
In addition, by deploying the remote access gateway in the
DMZ, the need to enable direct access from the Internet to
the LAN is avoided. Instead, remote users initiate a VPN
connection to the remote access gateway.
In this configuration, external gateway policy forwards VPN
traffic to the VPN concentrator, where encryption
terminates, and threat prevention, authentication, and
authorization take place. The VPN gateway forwards
requests to the internal servers.

Scenario 3: VPN termination as a dedicated single or
multiple Security Gateways (appliances), or virtual
instances running in VSX mode or as a Virtual Machine
(VM)
Administrators can use multiple appliances or virtual
versions of Check Point gateways to support remote
access connections.
In VSX deployments, each Virtual System can have a
Mobile Access portal with different applications, access
policies, authentication requirements, and mobile
clients. The same cloud be achieved by deploying
several security appliances as physical gateways.
For example, in the picture to the right, a VSX Gateway
has four Virtual Systems with remote access VPN
enabled. Each Virtual System is configured with
different settings to meet the company's needs for
different users.
This scenario also fits well when there is a demand to significantly increase the number of remote
access users in the existing setup or a new configuration in order to ensure proper performance
and scalability of security gateways responsible for remote access VPN.
With IPSec VPN scenarios, the recommendation is to leverage several security gateways or Virtual
Systems to enable Multiple Entry Points (MEP) with load sharing among the virtual gateways. The
remote users with a pre-installed client will automatically choose the virtual system to which they
will connect in random distribution, thus reducing the load on a single gateway.

