https://www.ibm.com/downloads/cas/RLXJNX2G

Today’s networks are more complex than ever before, and protecting
them from increasingly malicious and sophisticated attackers is a
never-ending task. Organizations seeking to protect their customers’
identities, safeguard their intellectual property and avoid business
disruption need to proactively monitor their environment so that they
can rapidly detect threats and accurately respond before attackers are
able to cause material damage.
IBM QRadar® Security Information and Event Management (SIEM)
is designed to provide security teams with centralized visibility into
enterprise-wide security data and actionable insights into the highest
priority threats. As a frst step, the solution ingests a vast amount of
data throughout the enterprise to provide a comprehensive view of
activity throughout on-premises and cloud-based environments.
As data is ingested, QRadar applies real-time, automated security
intelligence to quickly and accurately detect and prioritize threats.
Actionable alerts provide greater context into potential incidents,
enabling security analysts to swiftly respond to limit the attackers’
impact. Unlike other solutions, only QRadar is purpose-built to
address security use cases and intentionally designed to easily scale
with limited customization effort required.


Gain comprehensive, centralized visibility
Enterprise networks can span across traditional on-premises IT,
cloud-based and operational technology (OT) environments, all of
which require some level of oversight to effectively protect assets,
accurately detect threats and maintain compliance. Before security
teams can start analyzing data to detect and manage threats, they
must frst have centralized visibility into disparate security data.
QRadar enables organizations to gain centralized, comprehensive
visibility into siloed environments by collecting, parsing and
normalizing both log and flow data

The solution includes more than 450 pre-built Device Support
Modules (DSMs), which provide default setting integrations
with commercial off-the-shelf technologies. Customers
can simply point logs to QRadar, and the solution can
automatically detect the log source type and apply the
correct DSM to parse and normalize and the log data. As
a result, QRadar customers can get up and running much
faster than customers of alternative solutions. Additional
integrations can easily be added via apps in the IBM Security
App Exchange. QRadar also offers a simple DSM Editor
with an intuitive graphical user interface GUI that enables
security teams to easily defne how to parse logs from
custom applications.
To help easily establish the asset database, which enables
organizations to defne critical assets or network segments,
QRadar can inspect network flow data to automatically
identify and classify valid assets on the network based on
the applications, protocols, services and ports they use.
QRadar supports a wide variety of technologies, applications
and cloud services to help customers gain comprehensive
visibility into enterprise-wide activity. Once this data is
centralized, it can be automatically analyzed to identify known
threats, anomalies that may indicate unknown threats and
critical risks that may leave sensitive data exposed.
Automate security intelligence
to rapidly detect threats
QRadar SIEM is designed to automatically analyze and
correlate activity across multiple data sources including
logs, events, network flows, user activity, vulnerability
information and threat intelligence to identify known
and unknown threats.
QRadar SIEM intelligently correlates and analyzes a variety
of information, including the following activities:
• Security events: From frewalls, virtual private networks,
intrusion detection systems, intrusion prevention systems,
databases and more
• Network events: From switches, routers, servers, hosts
and more
• Network activity context: Layer 7 application context from
network and application traffc
• Cloud activity: From SaaS and Infrastructure as a Service
(IaaS) environments, such as Offce365, SalesForce.com,
Amazon Web Services (AWS), Azure and Google Cloud
• User and asset context: Contextual data from identity and
access management products and vulnerability scanners
• Endpoint events: From the Windows event log, Sysmon,
EDR solutions and more
• Application logs: From enterprise resource planning
(ERP) solutions, application databases, SaaS applications
and more
• Threat intelligence: From sources such as IBM X-Force®
QRadar includes hundreds of pre-built security use cases,
anomaly detection algorithms, rules and real-time correlation
policies to detect known and unknown threats. As threats are
discovered, the solution aggregates related security events
into single, prioritized alerts known as “offenses.” Offenses
are automatically prioritized based on both the severity of
the threat and the criticality of the assets involved.
Within each offense, security analysts can see the full chain
of threat activity from one single screen. From here, analysts
can easily drill down into specifc events or network flows to
start an investigation, assign the offense to a specifc analyst
or close it out. Offenses are automatically updated as new
related activity occurs so that analysts can see the most
up-to-date information at any given time. This unique
approach helps security analysts easily understand the most
critical threats in the environment by providing end-to-end
insight into each potential incident while simultaneously
reducing the total alert volume

Detect anomalous network,
user and application activity
As attackers become more sophisticated in their techniques,
known threat detection is no longer suffcient on its own.
Instead, organizations must also have the ability to detect
slight changes in network, user or system behavior that may
indicate unknown threats, such as malicious insiders,
compromised credentials or fleless malware.
QRadar contains a variety of anomaly detection capabilities
to identify changes in behavior that could be indicators
of an unknown threat. And the unique ability of QRadar to
monitor and analyze Layer 7 application traffc enables
it to more accurately identify anomalies that other solutions
may miss.
By optionally using QRadar Network Insights as part of the
SIEM deployment, organizations can gain insight into which
systems communicated with each other, which applications
were involved and what information was exchanged in the
packets. By correlating this information with other network,
log and user activity, security analysts can uncover abnormal
network activity that may be indicative of compromised hosts,
compromised users or data exfltration attempts.
While QRadar ships with numerous anomaly and behavioral
detection rules as default settings, security teams can also
create their own rules, tailor anomaly detection settings and
download over pre-built 160 apps from the IBM Security App
Exchange to augment their deployment.


Better manage compliance with pre-built
content, rules and reports
QRadar provides the transparency, accountability and
measurability critical to an organization’s success in meeting
regulatory mandates and reporting on compliance. The
solution’s ability to correlate and integrate threat intelligence
feeds yields more complete metrics for reporting on IT risks
for auditors. Hundreds of pre-built reports and rule templates
can help organizations more easily address industry
compliance requirements.
Profles of network assets can be grouped by business
function—for example, servers that are subject to Health
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
compliance audits—to help teams more easily report on
relevant activity as needed.
QRadar has the experience and resources needed to help
organizations address risk and regulatory exposure by
providing default setting compliance packages for General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), the Federal Information
Security Management Act (FISMA), Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX)
HIPAA, ISO 27001, Payment Card Industry Data Security

Standard (PCI DSS) and more. These packages are included
free of charge with a QRadar SIEM license and are available
in the IBM Security App Exchange.
Easily scale with changing needs
The flexible, scalable architecture of QRadar is designed to
support both large and small organizations with a variety of
needs. Smaller organizations can start with a single all-in-one
solution that can be easily upgraded into a distributed
deployment as needs evolve. Larger enterprise organizations
can deploy dedicated components to support global,
distributed networks with high data volumes. The QRadar
SIEM solution includes the following components: event
collectors, event processors, flow collectors, flow processors,
data nodes (for low cost storage and increased performance)
and a central console. All components are available as
hardware, software or virtual appliances. Software and virtual
appliance options can be deployed on-premises, in IaaS
environments or distributed across hybrid environments.
Regardless of deployment model, organizations can optionally
add in high availability and disaster recovery protection where
and when needed to help to ensure continuous operations.
For organizations seeking business resiliency, QRadar delivers
integrated automatic failover and full-disk synchronization
between systems without the need for additional third-party
fault management products. For organizations seeking data
protection and recovery, QRadar disaster recovery solutions
can forward live data, such as flows and events, from a
primary QRadar system to a secondary parallel system
located at a separate facility.



