SANS Institute
Information Security Reading Room

Security Network Auditing:
Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?
______________________________
Carl Garrett

Copyright SANS Institute 2020. Author Retains Full Rights.
This paper is from the SANS Institute Reading Room site. Reposting is not permitted without express
written permission.

STI Template Version May 2018

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be
Achieved?

GIAC (GSNA) Gold Certification
Author: Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com
Advisor: Dr. Johannes Ullrich

Accepted: 2020-08-09

Abstract
Since 2010, government and business organizations have begun to adopt the Zero-Trust
framework. Although the concept is a decade old, organizations are still in the infant
stages of its implementation. Given that tablets and mobile phones have become an
intricate part of business aids, all organizations will eventually integrate Zero-Trust into
their environments. Many third-party vendors market Zero-Trust tools; though, they only
provide one or two pieces to achieve "true" Zero-Trust.
Designing a security auditing Zero-Trust framework, professionals must use a layered
approach to defense-in-depth. They must also understand the principle of Least Common
Mechanism because complicated information technology systems are challenging to
control. In traditional perimeter networks, users must authenticate to an entire
organizational network, where perimeter-less Zero-Trust networks are segmented; thus,
users can log on a Zero-Trust network by accessing a single-segment at a time. This
technology eliminates the need for virtual private networks (VPN), thus, providing faster
access.
Additionally, most organizations state they audit their systems. However, this project
focuses on auditing Zero-Trust devices, applications, data, and network traffic, not
continuous logging. When implementing the Zero-Trust framework, organizations will
learn how to plan and audit for adequate security.

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?
1.

2

Introducing Zero-Trusts
Google experienced a security breach by China in 2009; thus, Google overhauled

its network the following year. The security incident was detrimental; therefore, Google
tasked its engineers to develop a stealthy solution. They called their initiative
BeyondCorp and, once fully developed, deployed their engineered solution beginning in
2010 (Osborn et al., 2016). The goal of BeyondCorp was to improve the security posture
of the entire company. At about the same time, John Kindervag of Forrester Research
coined the term "Zero-Trust." Kindervag studied and created Zero-Trust for similar
reasons Google designed BeyondCorp (Moscaritolo, 2011). For both philosophies,
security incidents were big problems because adversaries had already breached the
internal networks in many organizations. Although Google's BeyondCorp and
Kindervag's Zero-Trust formed in the year 2010 timeframe, the term, BeyondCorp, is
rarely used. Zero-Trust remains the preferred globally recognized term.

1.1. What is Zero-Trust?
Zero-Trust, simply stated, is a philosophy. It doesn't come from hardware or
software, although these components are required to manage the network posture. It
instructs security practitioners never to trust, always validate (Gilman & Barth 2017). The
Zero-Trust framework has five trust regions: users, devices, applications, data, and
network traffic (Bardowell & Lyles, 2020). For Zero-Trust, IT systems do not place
inherited trust in any of the five trust regions; though, verification for all five trust regions
is a requirement. In other words, the IT systems must verify the device, its state, and the
connected user before being allowed access to the network resource (Moscaritolo, 2011).
Furthermore, access to one network resource does not mean access will be granted to
other resources. For Zero-Trust, all networks, internal and external, are deemed
unfriendly.

1.2. Why is Zero-Trust Important?
Zero-Trust is a buzzword and a distinct marketing term. Just-In-Time Verified
Trust is a more substantial definition. However, this research will utilize the name ZeroTrust for this study. This technology is, thus, crucial for many reasons. First,
Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

3

organizations implementing Zero-Trust collapse adversarial attack surfaces. For example,
a user logs into an application connected to a data storage server. The user authenticates
through an Identity and Access Management (IAM) system and performs work activity
then logs out. Upon logout, all IT services to the application and storage server shut
down, and the attack surface closes. Even in a hostile network, lateral network traffic
ceases, causing the adversary to become frustrated.
Second, the Zero-Trust philosophy is essential when migrating to cloud-based
environments. With most organizations, the internal network perimeter has expanded into
the cloud; consequently, the security perimeter has disappeared as end-users have become
dependent on cloud services like Microsoft O365. The majority of organizations have
moved or will move a portion of their IT services to a cloud-based platform by 2021
(Shah, 2018). Therefore, a Zero-Trust implementation is vital for organizations to
safeguard their data and applications, especially if they embrace the seven-layered
security model with the Zero-Trust framework.
Last, the Zero-Trust framework lays the foundation for a faster, more robust
security posture. Zero-Trust can replace traditional VPN access. For example, in a
conventional network, a device and user must authenticate to the VPN before they are
allowed access to applications and data on enterprise networks. For Zero-Trust, users and
devices authenticate to the web apps and data without inheriting any other access rights to
other IT resources. This direct access method is faster because the users will not
authenticate to inherited services, only the specific IT system.

1.3. Problem with Zero-Trust
Due to its comprehensive approach to IT security, there are several issues with
Zero-Trust that organizations must define before implementing the technology. Those
issues include different classes of users, devices, applications, and data storage. For users,
organizations will have on-site users, remote users, contractors, customers, vendors, and
other third-party organizations requiring specific access. Then, organizations will have to
look at laptops and tablets for compliance. For most organizations, device control will be
challenging as organizations can only control employee's equipment, not external
customer equipment.
Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

4

Applications and data storage can become complicated too. Legacy application
revisions are needed to include multi-factor authentication. Plus, changes in data storage
authorizations are essential to match least privilege, not inherited permissions given on
traditional networks. Absolute Zero-Trust for most organizations isn't achievable due to
complex administrative duties; however, most organizations should begin to implement
some form of it.

1.4. Achieving Zero-Trust
Achieving Zero-Trust will be different for the various types of organizations. For
example, a manufacturing organization will most likely have additional Zero-Trust
requirements compared to a banking organization; or, an engineering organization will
undoubtedly have different requirements than a financial organization. For established
entities, Zero-Trust is more challenging to achieve due to legacy users, applications,
hardware servers, and data storage. Hybrid environments, on-premise, combined with
cloud-based IT systems, make it even tougher to attain complete Zero-Trust.
Unfortunately, no one size approach suits every business and government unit; however,
new organizations can immediately embrace the Zero-Trust framework. When planning
Zero-Trust, simple open designed IT systems are easier to manage (Saltzer & Schroeder,
1975).

2.

Trusting the Zero-Trust Process - Methodology
The testing environment for this research uses a self-built lab with a Microsoft

Azure cloud server infrastructure and two local virtual machines. The researcher chose
this model for its ease and duplication; though, an on-premise or other cloud solution like
Amazon Web Services is adequate as well. To audit a Zero-Trust model for compliance,
an understanding of the IT system's five pillars and access control technology is crucial.
See Figure 1: Access Control Engine below.

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

5

Figure 1: Access Control Engine

For this research, the expectation is to deny all access to all five trust pillars by
default; then, allow access as needed. The researcher will also use examples of microsegmentation to demonstrate a critical foundational principle of the Zero-Trust
framework. Micro-segmentation creates logical network segments between controlled
traffic from web apps to databases. This technique design is granular and prevents
adversarial lateral movement from propagating, especially for web applications. Next, the
researcher builds net-flow transports, which allows network traffic only through the
needed ports. Then, for testing, the researcher completes several different mock
scenarios.

3.

Zero-Trust Devices and Users Authentication
For valid Zero-Trust, IT Auditors must verify with IT Administrators that all

devices on the Zero-Trust segmentation are recognized and validated. The auditor must
also know the processes to prove the devices are valid. There are are two primary device
groups: bring your own device (BYOD) and organization devices. Organizations will
provision their own devices through active directory; however, for BYOD, an endpoint
management solution like Microsoft Enterprise Mobility and Security, MobileIron, or
other platforms are necessary. Endpoint management solutions probe the device's
hardware features to determine if a device meets the required hardware security

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

6

standards. Plus, Zero-Trust requires an endpoint management solution for external
customer-facing devices.
User trust in the Zero-Trust security realm is continuously changing. Passwordbased user authentication is still widely used. However, single password-based
authentication does not meet Zero-Trust conditions. Therefore, as a part of a Zero-Trust
approach, organizations should make use of more enhanced user authentication practices.
Multi-factor authentication is an ideal solution. Plus, for the very best multi-factor
authentication, a smart card, USB token, certificates, and biometrics should be used. For
most customer-based web applications, username/password and one-time-passcode will
be adequate for multi-factor.

3.1. Case Study 1: Device and User Authentication
3.1.1. Test 1: Device Validity
In this simple mock scenario, the researcher created a Microsoft Azure lab with
Azure Active Directory and Microsoft Endpoint Management (MEM). Then, the
researcher registers the Windows10 virtual machines to Microsoft Intune, which is part of
the MEM solution. See Figure 2: Device Enrollment below. In this test, the researcher
replicated the registration process to validate the enrolled devices.

Figure 2: Device Enrollment

3.1.2. Test 2: User Authentication
In this test, the researcher created an Azure Web App, deployed application code,
and enabled multi-factor authentication using Azure Active Directory. First, for
establishing the Web App, the researcher logged into the Azure portal and created a
resource app service called zerotrustlab2. For this to work correctly, a programmer
uploads into the Azure cloud the program code. Then, Azure figures out the resources it
Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

7

needs to run the system code. Therefore, if the web application needs a virtual machine,
then Azure deploys one. Then, to implement the web application, the researcher added an
external repository source code from GitHub with a file transport protocol (FTP)
connection. After that, the researcher performed a validation test with the new URL.
Finally, the researcher enabled multi-factor authentication in Azure Active
Directory. Azure Active Directory supports a simple method to create user credentials
and controls the levels of access for those users. Then, the researcher configured the user
account for multi-factor authentication in Azure Active Directory. To work correctly, a
deployed application uses Azure Active Directory to prompt for validation before gaining
access to the website. If the app opens after proper multi-factor authentication, Zero-Trust
access is validated. See Figure 3: Multi-factor Authentication below.

Figure 3: Multi-factor Authentication

3.2. Device/Users Findings and Auditing
In Test 1, it is essential to realize that devices that are allowed access to apps and
data must have identities in an access control management system like Microsoft
Endpoint Management. Even though this was a simple scenario, without device control,
Zero-Trust does not exist. The researcher confirmed unregistered devices could not
access the IT system.
For successful IT audits, auditors must confirm there is an adequately configured
endpoint management system. Auditors must verify that devices cannot reach IT systems
that aren't registered. Plus, devices must also have least privilege. In other words, a laptop

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

8

registered on an endpoint management system may have more or less access than a tablet
or other IoT device.
In Test 2, the researcher had trouble initially setting up multi-factor
authentication, which clarifies that single-factor authentication is the default. However,
single-factor authentication credentials do not meet Zero-Trust benchmarks due to
widespread credential stealing. After creating the ZeroTrustLab2 web app, a provisioned
app in the "All applications" blade of Azure Active Directory appears. Then, the
researcher enabled multi-factor authentication on the users and assigned the web app to
each user to authenticate.
During testing, the researcher configured four separate user accounts. Two
accounts had multi-factor authentication enabled, and two had single-factor
authentication. Both types of user accounts were allowed into the web app. The only
difference was that a one-time-passcode was texted to the researcher for the multi-factor
authentication accounts to complete the logon. Looking into this further, the researcher
needed to upgrade Azure Active Directory for the web app to require only multi-factor
authentication. After the upgrade of Azure Active Directory, the web app denied singlefactor authentication user accounts. See Figure 4: Access Denied below.

Figure 4: Access Denied

If the researcher is auditing for multi-factor authentication compliance, user
accounts must have multi-factor authentication configured, and web apps must require
multi-factor authentication. It would have been simpler for the researcher to create groups
and assign users; though, this was not available in the free version of Azure Active
Directory. Still, the concept of least privilege was prevalent as just enough access was
given to the users who required the app.

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

4.

9

Zero-Trust Application Auditing
For web apps, the compute and application components usually function as a

single unit. It's also important to understand that applications are typically interfaces to
databases like SQL. Micro-segmented Zero-Trust encompasses an application that writes
data to an authorized database via encrypted network net-flows. Putting these
components together provides trusted cybersecurity.

4.1. Case Study 2: Web Application Testing
4.1.1. Test 1: Application Segmentation
In Case Study1, Test 2, the researcher took the built web app and provisioned it
for multi-factor authentication with Azure Active Directory. Yet, to provision the web
app, App Service Authentication must be selected to "On" and set to "Log in with Azure
Active Directory." Also, the researcher could have used authentication services from
Facebook, Twitter, or Google; however, organizations should not rely on other platforms
to authenticate. To lock down the web app to multi-factor authentication and device
compliance, the researcher configured conditional access in Azure Active Directory. See
Figure 5: Conditional Access below. The researcher then tested for access.

Figure 5: Conditional Access

4.1.2. Test 2: Enabling TLS Between Client and Server
In this test, the researcher configured the IIS web server with https to require
client certificates before accepting web app access. This technology worked when the
web app refused a connection when the client did not get issued certificates. On the other
hand, the web app granted access to the client that received certificates.

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

10

4.2. Application Findings and Auditing
For Case Study 2, the researcher confirmed that proper conditional access on the
web app using least privilege are keys to successful Zero-Trust compliance. Furthermore,
the researcher tested connectivity with a certificate and achieved positive results. If the
user was issued a certificate, the web app opens. Without a certificate, the web app denies
access. The researcher also confirmed that legacy web apps would be a concern without
authentication and certificates. An external IT Auditor should not have access to an
organization's network and surf to an open web app without authentication and
certificates. If the website opens, the micro-segment is not Zero-Trust compliant. Many
organizations will depend on third-party apps to grant access to legacy web apps to
bridge the gap until they can micro-segment all their IT systems. However, third-party
apps complicate organizations due to added IT administrative responsibilities.
Checking for compliance, an external IT auditor must get a listing of all web
applications and attempt to login. If the auditor can get into any web apps without
credentials, the auditor must determine security risk. Auditors must evaluate customerfacing web apps as to the procedures to enroll and verify authenticity. Also, auditors must
verify certificates issued to users with proper credentials for privileged access. If the web
app writes data to a database, the auditor must evaluate that users and devices
authenticate using multi-factor. Auditors must access internal web apps too. For all
internal web apps with sensitive records, the organizational policy should require multifactor authentication. Then, since third-party identity and access management
applications involve complex configurations, IT Auditors should verify authentication
with legacy web apps.

5.

Zero-Trust Data Storage and Network Auditing
The researcher kept data storage and networking together for the case study

because they correlate and are keys to effective Zero-Trust compliance. For data storage,
IT systems must be able to encrypt data-at-rest, and, for networking, IT systems should
encrypt data-in-motion. Micro-segmenting data-at-rest and data-in-motion require
programmers to write code with data validation using reliable net-flows. The only way to

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

11

check for Zero-Trust compliance is to label data, such as sensitive, classified, or
unclassified, and know where and how the data travels on the network.

5.1. Case Study 3: Storage Data and Network Flows
5.1.1. Test 1: Disk Encryption
For Test 1, the researcher took the Window Server 2016 virtual machine and
added storage to the disk volume. The researcher created an Azure key vault and
implemented encryption to the virtual disk. For confirmation, the researcher logged into
the Windows 2016 server, navigated the disk volume, and verified encryption on the
storage drive.
5.1.2. Test 2: SQL Data Encryption
In Test 2, the researcher configured an Azure SQL database and used the existing
2016 Windows Server with SQL Server Management Studio. Using Azure's deterministic
encryption, the researcher configured the sample database. From SQL Server
Management Studio, the researcher logged into the test sample to set the database with
"Enable Always" encrypted. Personally identifiable information (PII) data then filled the
database tables with phone numbers, email addresses, and password hashes. Then, the
researcher encrypted only the phone numbers on the sample database. To verify data
encryption, the researcher attempted to access the data from a query search.
5.1.3. Test 3: Data-In-Motion Encryption
Using Azure storage, the researcher used a JPEG image that is only available
through secure TLS 1.2 encryption. The researcher experimented with network traffic
flows and access by developing an encrypted network highway between the web app and
storage vault. This network highway was a bi-directional path; and, it did not have access
or other exits along the route. For this to work correctly, the researcher required traffic
flow through https only. Then, only the web app had access to the JPEG files by building
a shared access signature, which granted access only to the storage vault from the web
app itself. A successful rendered web app confirmed micro-segmentation, and data
encryption operated as it should.

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

12

5.2. Data Storage/Network Findings and Auditing
For the provisioned 2016 Windows Server virtual machine, the researcher
confirmed that Azure created drive encryption during the initial setup. However, by
adding additional storage capacity at a later time, IT Admins must configure the new
storage volume for encryption because it is not enabled by default. This situation can
leave organizations vulnerable. Auditors must confirm with top leadership whether or not
formatted disk volumes have stout encryption. See Figure 6: Disk Encryption below.

Figure 6: Disk Encryption

For Test 2, the researcher validated the deterministic encryption method in the
Azure portal for SQL data. This encryption technique is faster than most encryption
algorithms; though, most encryption standards are applicable. IT auditors must also
validate encryption on the data itself, especially personally identifiable information (PII)
data. The researcher configured encryption on the phone number table and confirmed it
works. See Figure 7: Encrypted Data below. All PII should be encrypted. IT auditors
must look at all PII in databases and determine access vulnerabilities.

Figure 7: Encrypted Data

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

13

For Test 3, the researcher confirmed data-in-motion from the storage vault to the
web app using secure https. See Figure 8: Enabled TLS 1.2 below. The researcher

Figure 8: Enabled TLS 1.2

also verified the shared access signature connector, which grants access only from the
storage vault to the web app. For this test to be a successful audit, the auditor must verify
TLS 1.2 encryption for network traffic flows. Plus, the auditor must confirm that
unsecured accounts cannot open web apps. See Figure 9: Unsecured Account below.

Figure 9: Unsecured Account

6.

Designing Zero-Trust
Proper design of Zero-Trust IT systems is no small task; however, security

processes should not make the IT resource more challenging to access (Saltzer &
Schroeder, 1975). The researcher sat through a demo of an identity access management
platform from a third-party provider. The sales engineer demonstrated how one could
take all your different IT systems in all the various platforms and bundle them in one
location on their software platform. The software platform bundle advertises itself as a
Zero-Trust privilege access management system. Though a great product, the additional
security connectors add new challenges by adding complex layers to the organization's IT
systems.

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

14

Based on these case studies, organizations can simplify all their system if they do
the following. First, all organizations should have device standards, including ones for
mobile tablets and phones. Second, organizations should choose just one platform like
Microsoft Azure, Google, AWS, or on-premise IT systems. Too many IT platforms
increase complications. Third, micro-segment all networking, databases, and web
applications into trusted segments. Last, encrypt all data-at-rest and data-in-motion. IT
auditors must understand these conditions to simplify organizational systems.

6.1. Mature Versus New Organizations
Existing technology, along with different organizational requirements, determine
the Zero-Trust implementation plan. Established networks have more traditional IT
systems, with a perimeter firewall around the organization. For these networks, external
devices and network traffic are untrusted while internal network traffic is trusted. On the
other hand, Zero-Trust systems do not have perimeters. They are micro-segmented. Due
to backing out of existing technology, mature organizations will find Zero-Trust
implementation challenging. However, if an organization is new, it should pursue ZeroTrust architecture from the beginning.
6.1.1. Part 1: Designing for Micro-segmentation
When constructing Zero-Trust, large and small organizations should plan for
future IT operations. Zero-Trust designing does not start with next-generation firewalls or
identity access management third-party systems. Zero-Trust starts with microsegmentation first. See Figure 10: Micro-segment below.

Figure 10: Micro-segment

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

15

For example, Mario is a project manager for Foam, Inc. that has adopted ZeroTrust architecture. The finance department would like Mario's team to develop a web app
to track credit terms for all their business to business (B2B) customers based on an
algorithm with the following conditions:
•

How many years has the customer conducted business with Foam, Inc?

•

What amount of sales dollars per year does the customer do with Foam, Inc?

•

What is the amount of Foam, Inc. accounts receivables from the customer?

Also, within the web app, the finance department will view B2B contacts, phone
numbers, email addresses, B2B customer birthdays, plus many files.
For Mario to be successful, he must first provision an encrypted database and file
storage. At the same time, the developer designs the application according to the needs of
the finance department. Mario then works with an IT admin to configure the web app to
communicate with the database and file storage. Last, Mario establishes a virtual network
and provisions networking on a cloud-based or on-premise platform using TLS 1.2
encryption. This sequence of events creates a micro-segmentation for this web app.
All organizations can have successful micro-segment implementations if they
create plans and maintain control of their web apps. Azure, Google, and AWS cloud
providers publish Zero-Trust architecture plan designs to follow. Furthermore, IT
auditors should examine every micro-segment for data protection. Organizational data is
the most critical element to safeguard. Application and Network layers should act as a
protection mechanism to structural data. See Figure 11: Protection below.

Figure 11: Protection

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

16

6.1.2. Part 2: Designing Identity Access
Identity and Access Management (IAM) is the other component of Zero-Trust
architecture. The role of IAM is to grant access to web apps based on predefined
privileges. Most users and devices are external customers; however, many web apps
programmed today are for internal organizational users. For IAM systems to work, one
must configure the access management engine. The engine processes the request to allow
authenticated users and devices through the gateway to the micro-segments. See Figure
12: Identity & Access below.

Figure 12: Identity & Access

Although this sketch is a basic prototype, most IAM systems function similarly to this
architectural design. When configuring an IAM, use these conditions:
•

Enable multi-factor authentication

•

Enable single sign-on

•

Migrate devices and users to one database and centralize

•

If using mobile devices, use cloud-based identity management

•

Enable self-services like registering devices and password resets

•

Assign access to authorized web apps according to least privilege best practices

•

Lockdown internal identities based on standard devices

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

17

For IT auditors, assessing is simple! Auditors should evaluate for best practices
based on the above conditions. When configured correctly, IAM adds layers of protection
of our most valuable assets, data, and storage. See Figure 13: Layered Protection below.

Figure 13: Layered Protection

6.2.

The Finished Product
Zero-Trust Architecture has only two high-level components: the micro-segment

and the IAM system. When these two-components work in harmony, IT security is more
robust without the use of third-party devices like dedicated web-access firewalls and
virtual private networks. Additionally, this research focuses on IT security auditing.
Understanding the Zero-Trust design with layered protection is the difference between
good and great IT auditors. For robust security, users and devices authenticate with the
access management engine, opening the gateway to micro-segmentation web
applications.

7.

Migrating to Zero-Trust
When migrating from a traditional network to a Zero-Trust system, the essential

item for organizations to consider is the platform. There are many different cloud vendors
to consider, including an on-premise solution. Creating a plan on a single platform is
essential when migrating. The blueprint will look different based on the organization's
needs. For example, XYZ Widget Factory, with fifty locations and thirty-five thousand
workers world-wide, will have unique migration plans versus an engineering company
with one locale and thirty-five employees.
Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

18

All organizations, regardless of size, should micro-segment all future developed
web applications. Large organizations should migrate smaller groups of legacy web apps
into micro-segmentation. Then, use rolling deployments to implement them. Small
organizations should consider one major implementation after the legacy web apps have
been micro-segmented. Next, all organizations should employ an IAM solution, apply the
micro-segmented connector to the web apps, and migrate to it. Whether large or small,
organizations can complete this task quickly. Last, organizations should monitor ZeroTrust technology for data exfiltration.
For Zero-Trust, other items must take place during the migration journey.
Organizations must educate and train their user population. Since the Covid-19
pandemic, only thirty-eight percent of the workforce go to their workplace every day
(Bekker, 2020). Therefore, workers have overused virtual private networks (VPN) and
virtual desktop interfaces (VDI) from remote locations. Zero-Trust Architecture solves
these issues by eliminating the need for those technologies. Finally, when considering a
platform like Azure or an on-premise solution, determine future operations and best
value. Nearly all organizations have some form of cloud-based applications due to the
rising numbers of tablets and mobile phones used for business. Plus, cloud-based
platforms like Azure make it simple to transfer web-based applications. Cloud computing
migration is more straightforward to quickly provision servers, data storage, and web
hosting.

8. Assessing and Auditing Zero-Trust
Once an organization begins to migrate to Zero-Trust, IT security, IT admins, and
IT auditors should review proper Zero-Trust guidelines. Since auditing is the process of
reviewing and verifying the operation, assessing should also take place to identify the
Zero-Trust weaknesses. Once Zero-Trust vulnerabilities are identified, remediate
immediately.

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

19

8.1. Zero-Trust Auditing List
When auditing for Zero-Trust, different organizations will have various solutions
based on the type of hardware, software, and other IT services. Internal IT auditors must
understand the types of IT systems in their organization to build an auditing checklist;
however, external auditors will develop a generic list before proceeding with an audit. In
either case, when creating a list, use the philosophy of the seven-layer protection model.
Physical security, devices, and identities can gain access to micro-segmented networks,
applications, and data only through an access management system. See Figure 13:
Layered Protection above.
Below is a list of everyday items to check for Zero-Trust compliance. This list is
by no means complete; still, it acts as a starting point for auditors.
Zero Trust Auditing
Physical Security

Devices

Users

Applications

Checklist
1. Is your physical equipment locked with double security,
i.e., door, fence, cabinet, etc.?
2. Do IoT devices have "Find My Device" applied?
1. Is an endpoint management system deployed?
2. Are device standards configured for all endpoints,
tablets, and mobile devices?
3. Are limits placed on the number of devices users or
customers can register?
4. Do organizations provision their own devices?
5. Can registered devices can reach IT systems?
6. Do registered devices have least privilege?
7. Can unregistered devices reach IT systems?
8. Are all devices encrypted and passcode protected?
1. Is multi-factor authentication enabled for all users?
2. For larger organizations, are groups formed for
administrative ease?
3. Are users allowed access to services and applications
they don't need?
4. Is privilege access configured?
1. Are all web apps micro-segmented?
2. Do all web apps require multi-factor authentication?
3. Is single-sign-on implemented?
4. Do all customer-facing web apps require enrollment and
registration?
5. Is a third-party IAM solution used?

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

Data and Networking

Interview Sample

20

6. Are applications listed in your Identity and Access
Management (IAM) system like Azure Active Directory?
1. Is all data-at-rest encrypted?
2. Is all data-in-motion encrypted?
3. Have all dataflows been identified and tunneled from the
web app to the database?
4. Have personal and business data been segmented?
1. Are IT policies updated?
2. Do users understand AUP?
3. Do organizational managers understand the dangers of
excess privilege access for their direct reports?
4. Do developers/programmers write secure code?
5. Do database admins understand dataflows?

8.2. Policies, Processes, and Procedures
When auditing, auditors should look at the current policies, processes, and
procedures to determine if they comply with the Zero-Trust framework. All users should
sign an acceptable use policy (AUP) and should understand it. Furthermore, users should
understand what is not appropriate and know the consequences if violations occur. IT
admins must develop procedures for business managers in determining access for their
direct reports.
For developers and database admins, an understanding of the Zero-Trust process
is essential for developing web apps. No longer can developers rely on IT security for
implementing layered trust. Developers and database admins must understand dataflows
and validation input. These processes are essential for achieving micro-segmentation.
Moreover, organizations should require peer code review to verify it meets the ZeroTrust framework.
When auditing, auditors should interview a sample of end-users, database admins,
and developers. If the interviewees don't understand the policies, processes, and
procedures, users will figure out ways to circumvent security standards instead of using
proper methods to request privileged access. Auditors should never underestimate the
value of internal interviews.

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

21

9. Conclusion
Many organizations believe they operate using Zero-Trust principles. However,
organizations that have bought into the concept of Zero-Trust are performing some
functions of Zero-Trust. Most organizations cannot perform all tasks of Zero-Trust yet, as
each organization is different and must devise its specific Zero-Trust benchmarks.
For an ultimately successful Zero-Trust organization, all networks will be
segmented, all data will be categorized and protected, all devices isolated and
authenticated, and all identities will have implemented the principle of least privilege.
Still, due to the high level of granularity for Zero-Trust implementations, the study
revealed many ways the Zero-Trust operations will fail. Organizations immediately lose
device controls when they allow BYOD. Accessing the same data from different
applications violates the Zero-Trust micro-segmented framework. Other Zero-Trust
failures include open, unencrypted data, excess privilege access, and unknown dataflows.
Furthermore, organizational IT staffing will carry heavy workloads converting legacy
web applications to meet Zero-Trust requirements. Securing an organization's IT systems
using this philosophy isn't easy; however, it is necessary due to the number of devices
and users working remotely.
The Zero-Trust framework can be exasperatingly complicated, especially for
established organizations. IT auditors will have their work cut out for them for many
years to come due to organizations implementing this philosophy. Auditors will spend
more time identifying the gaps in Zero-Trust than actually auditing for Zero-Trust
compliance. However, the most critical object in auditing is how to guard organizational
data. Even though Zero-Trust is more complicated, it's worth the investment.

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Security Network Auditing: Can Zero-Trust Be Achieved?

22

References
Bardowell, M., & Lyles, M. (2020). Zero Trust Networks Study Guide. Retrieved July
13, 2020, from
https://assets.ctfassets.net/kvf8rpi09wgk/6pX3i1UavAuqkz7FlZFirV/d9b0861878a
1d2bae3c610acc9e2829d/Zero_Trust_Networks_Study_Guide__1_.pdf
Bekker, G. (2020, April 13). A Practical Approach to Replacing VPNs with Zero Trust
Access. Retrieved August 01, 2020, from https://blog.banyansecurity.io/blog/apractical-approach-to-replacing-vpns-with-zero-trust-access
Gilman, E., & Barth, D. (2017). Zero trust networks: Building secure systems in
untrusted networks. Sebastopol, CA: O'Reilly Media.
McKay, P. (2020, March 02). How to find the right zero trust strategy. Retrieved June 24,
2020, from https://www.computerweekly.com/feature/How-to-find-the-right-zerotrust-strategy
Moscaritolo, A. (2011, June 01). Eliminating trust: The zero-trust model. Retrieved June
28, 2020, from https://www.scmagazine.com/home/securitynews/features/eliminating-trust-the-zero-trust-model/
Osborn, B., McWilliams, J., Beyer, B., & Saltonstall, M. (2016, March). BeyondCorp
Design to Deployment at Google SECURITY. Retrieved July 1, 2020, from
https://research.google.com/pubs/archive/44860.pdf
Rose, S., Borchert, O., Mitchell, S., & Connelly, S. (2020). Zero Trust Architecture
(Special Publication ed., 800-207, pp. 1-58) (United States, U.S. Department of
Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology). Gaithersburg, MD:
NIST.
Saltzer, J., & Schroeder, M. (1975, April 17). The Protection of Information in Computer
Systems. Retrieved June 4, 2020, from
https://www.cs.virginia.edu/~evans/cs551/saltzer/
Shah, T. (2018, December 13). How Zero Trust Organizations Secure the Cloud.
Retrieved July 14, 2020, from https://www.secureworldexpo.com/industrynews/zero-trust-orgs-secure-cloud
Teitler, K. (2019, January 11). What Auditors Must Know About Zero Trust Networking.
Retrieved June 11, 2020, from https://internalaudit360.com/what-internal-auditorsmust-know-about-zero-trust-networking/ediate

Carl Garrett, cgarrett42@gmail.com

Last Updated: October 18th, 2020

Upcoming SANS Training
Click here to view a list of all SANS Courses
SANS Sydney 2020

Sydney, AU

Nov 02, 2020 - Nov 14, 2020

Live Event

SANS Secure Thailand

Bangkok, TH

Nov 09, 2020 - Nov 14, 2020

Live Event

APAC ICS Summit & Training 2020

Singapore, SG

Nov 13, 2020 - Nov 28, 2020

Live Event

SANS Community CTF

,

Nov 19, 2020 - Nov 20, 2020

Self Paced

SANS Local: Oslo November 2020

Oslo, NO

Nov 23, 2020 - Nov 28, 2020

Live Event

SANS Wellington 2020

Wellington, NZ

Nov 30, 2020 - Dec 12, 2020

Live Event

SANS OnDemand

OnlineUS

Anytime

Self Paced

SANS SelfStudy

Books & MP3s OnlyUS

Anytime

Self Paced

