Introducing Zero-Trusts
Google experienced a security breach by China in 2009; thus, Google overhauled
its network the following year. The security incident was detrimental; therefore, Google
tasked its engineers to develop a stealthy solution. They called their initiative
BeyondCorp and, once fully developed, deployed their engineered solution beginning in
2010 (Osborn et al., 2016). The goal of BeyondCorp was to improve the security posture
of the entire company. At about the same time, John Kindervag of Forrester Research
coined the term "Zero-Trust." Kindervag studied and created Zero-Trust for similar
reasons Google designed BeyondCorp (Moscaritolo, 2011). For both philosophies,
security incidents were big problems because adversaries had already breached the
internal networks in many organizations. Although Google's BeyondCorp and
Kindervag's Zero-Trust formed in the year 2010 timeframe, the term, BeyondCorp, is
rarely used. Zero-Trust remains the preferred globally recognized term.
1.1. What is Zero-Trust?
Zero-Trust, simply stated, is a philosophy. It doesn't come from hardware or
software, although these components are required to manage the network posture. It
instructs security practitioners never to trust, always validate (Gilman & Barth 2017). The
Zero-Trust framework has five trust regions: users, devices, applications, data, and
network traffic (Bardowell & Lyles, 2020). For Zero-Trust, IT systems do not place
inherited trust in any of the five trust regions; though, verification for all five trust regions
is a requirement. In other words, the IT systems must verify the device, its state, and the
connected user before being allowed access to the network resource (Moscaritolo, 2011).
Furthermore, access to one network resource does not mean access will be granted to
other resources. For Zero-Trust, all networks, internal and external, are deemed
unfriendly.
1.2. Why is Zero-Trust Important?
Zero-Trust is a buzzword and a distinct marketing term. Just-In-Time Verified
Trust is a more substantial definition. However, this research will utilize the name ZeroTrust for this study. This technology is, thus, crucial for many reasons. First,

organizations implementing Zero-Trust collapse adversarial attack surfaces. For example,
a user logs into an application connected to a data storage server. The user authenticates
through an Identity and Access Management (IAM) system and performs work activity
then logs out. Upon logout, all IT services to the application and storage server shut
down, and the attack surface closes. Even in a hostile network, lateral network traffic
ceases, causing the adversary to become frustrated.
Second, the Zero-Trust philosophy is essential when migrating to cloud-based
environments. With most organizations, the internal network perimeter has expanded into
the cloud; consequently, the security perimeter has disappeared as end-users have become
dependent on cloud services like Microsoft O365. The majority of organizations have
moved or will move a portion of their IT services to a cloud-based platform by 2021
(Shah, 2018). Therefore, a Zero-Trust implementation is vital for organizations to
safeguard their data and applications, especially if they embrace the seven-layered
security model with the Zero-Trust framework.
Last, the Zero-Trust framework lays the foundation for a faster, more robust
security posture. Zero-Trust can replace traditional VPN access. For example, in a
conventional network, a device and user must authenticate to the VPN before they are
allowed access to applications and data on enterprise networks. For Zero-Trust, users and
devices authenticate to the web apps and data without inheriting any other access rights to
other IT resources. This direct access method is faster because the users will not
authenticate to inherited services, only the specific IT system.
1.3. Problem with Zero-Trust
Due to its comprehensive approach to IT security, there are several issues with
Zero-Trust that organizations must define before implementing the technology. Those
issues include different classes of users, devices, applications, and data storage. For users,
organizations will have on-site users, remote users, contractors, customers, vendors, and
other third-party organizations requiring specific access. Then, organizations will have to
look at laptops and tablets for compliance. For most organizations, device control will be
challenging as organizations can only control employee's equipment, not external
customer equipment.

Applications and data storage can become complicated too. Legacy application
revisions are needed to include multi-factor authentication. Plus, changes in data storage
authorizations are essential to match least privilege, not inherited permissions given on
traditional networks. Absolute Zero-Trust for most organizations isn't achievable due to
complex administrative duties; however, most organizations should begin to implement
some form of it.
1.4. Achieving Zero-Trust
Achieving Zero-Trust will be different for the various types of organizations. For
example, a manufacturing organization will most likely have additional Zero-Trust
requirements compared to a banking organization; or, an engineering organization will
undoubtedly have different requirements than a financial organization. For established
entities, Zero-Trust is more challenging to achieve due to legacy users, applications,
hardware servers, and data storage. Hybrid environments, on-premise, combined with
cloud-based IT systems, make it even tougher to attain complete Zero-Trust.
Unfortunately, no one size approach suits every business and government unit; however,
new organizations can immediately embrace the Zero-Trust framework. When planning
Zero-Trust, simple open designed IT systems are easier to manage (Saltzer & Schroeder,
1975).
2. Trusting the Zero-Trust Process - Methodology
The testing environment for this research uses a self-built lab with a Microsoft
Azure cloud server infrastructure and two local virtual machines. The researcher chose
this model for its ease and duplication; though, an on-premise or other cloud solution like
Amazon Web Services is adequate as well. To audit a Zero-Trust model for compliance,
an understanding of the IT system's five pillars and access control technology is crucial.

For this research, the expectation is to deny all access to all five trust pillars by
default; then, allow access as needed. The researcher will also use examples of microsegmentation to demonstrate a critical foundational principle of the Zero-Trust
framework. Micro-segmentation creates logical network segments between controlled
traffic from web apps to databases. This technique design is granular and prevents
adversarial lateral movement from propagating, especially for web applications. Next, the
researcher builds net-flow transports, which allows network traffic only through the
needed ports. Then, for testing, the researcher completes several different mock
scenarios

For valid Zero-Trust, IT Auditors must verify with IT Administrators that all
devices on the Zero-Trust segmentation are recognized and validated. The auditor must
also know the processes to prove the devices are valid. There are are two primary device
groups: bring your own device (BYOD) and organization devices. Organizations will
provision their own devices through active directory; however, for BYOD, an endpoint
management solution like Microsoft Enterprise Mobility and Security, MobileIron, or
other platforms are necessary. Endpoint management solutions probe the device's
hardware features to determine if a device meets the required hardware security

standards. Plus, Zero-Trust requires an endpoint management solution for external
customer-facing devices.
User trust in the Zero-Trust security realm is continuously changing. Passwordbased user authentication is still widely used. However, single password-based
authentication does not meet Zero-Trust conditions. Therefore, as a part of a Zero-Trust
approach, organizations should make use of more enhanced user authentication practices.
Multi-factor authentication is an ideal solution. Plus, for the very best multi-factor
authentication, a smart card, USB token, certificates, and biometrics should be used. For
most customer-based web applications, username/password and one-time-passcode will
be adequate for multi-factor.



